<!--
title:   Muddle
author:  Du Bois, W.E.B.
journal: The Crisis
year:    1914
volume:  8
issue:   3
pages:   125-126
-->

# Muddle (1914)

The Negro problem is undoubtedly reaching a degree of spiritual
complication which makes the onlooker hesitate between tears and
hysterical laughter. A National Conference of Charities and Correction
recently met in a great southern city. It is a conference that numbers
in its membership practically every great name in American social
reform. It stands for advance and uplift, help and development in all
lines of human endeavor. It met in Memphis. Memphis has a population of
142,619 with 52,441 Negroes and is the geographical center of the
largest Negro population in the western world. The traveler from
Altruria would surely assume that the problems touching these darker
thousands and the relations of white and black would have been a matter
of serious, thoughtful consideration. Not so. The National Association
for the Advancement of Colored People pleaded for the inclusion of such
subjects as matters of general discussion. But as the *Survey* says, the
Negro problem was "not invited" and appeared but rarely and quite
incidentally on the program.

The excuse given by the officials was that the subject was too
controversial and that the Southern Sociological Congress, meeting
during the sessions of the Charities Conference, would discuss these
matters. Very good. But would not this same traveller from Altruria
assume that at least every effort would be made to interest colored people in the general work of the conference? Here were matters touching the saving of children, the reduction of crime, increased cleanliness, the protection of mothers, conditions of labor, etc., all of which touched the colored people very
closely in their every-day life. One would have thought that the
highways and hedges would have been scoured to make the colored people
of Memphis, and particularly their teachers, preachers, professional men
and business men, become acquainted with modern philanthropic effort.
This was not done. On the contrary, at the peremptory demand of the
local white committee all Negroes were segregated in the gallery and, as
a result, not a dozen Negroes attended the week's sessions of this
mighty conference. How could they and retain their self-respect?

It is doubtless the courteous and proper thing for the National
Conference to defer, in many things, to the wish and opinion of the
local entertaining committee. But are there no limits to such deference?
Is there no place where decency and principle can make a last stand?

In contrast to the moral cowardice of the northern leaders of social
reform, the Southern Sociological Congress to whom the local colored
committee also appealed for decent consideration in the matter of
accommodation, decided that they might be admitted to the ground floor
of the theatre where both associations were holding their main sessions.
The proprietors of the theatre thereupon objected and the Sociological Congress changed the place of meeting. So that hundreds of colored people attended the meeting of this Congress.

If, however, anyone thinks that this has been a happy solution of the
difficulty, let them listen to Mr. Clarence Poe, of North Carolina. Mr.
Poe, in declining re-election to the Executive Committee of the
Congress, says: "In the first place, I ought to explain that while I attended some of the sectional meetings of the Congress in Atlanta last year, I did not
attend the general session or the race problem meetings, and it was not
until I attended this year's meetings in Memphis that I discovered that
white men and white women, Negro men and Negro women are all admitted on
terms of equality as members and as participants in the Congress. At
Memphis, moreover, the seating of both whites and Negroes on the first
floor and the- crowding out of white ladies by Negro men became so
offensive (cultured ladies from my own town, for example, were escorted
to their seats by Negro ushers) that the local Memphis committee could
not endure it, and passed a resolution asking the officers to have the
Negroes seated separately in the first balcony. And then it was that
'the officers of the conference' the daily papers said---I do not know
what officers, for you had just left town, I believe, and so far as I
know, the Executive Committee was not consulted---but at any rate, the
'officers,' in order to keep the Negro members right with the whites,
left the Orpheum Theatre, which our Memphis hosts had provided, and
adjourned to a separate theatre for a final meeting on the Negro problem
at which one white man, one Negro, and one mixed-breed entertained the
mixed assemblage of members."

This means that advanced opinion of the South has a fight on its hands
and that in the next ten years it is going to be determined whether or
not the South can have two opinions concerning the Negro: one, the
reactionary suppression of Poe, and the other, social uplift in "The Human Way." Moreover,
the North, characteristically, has deserted the advanced South at just
the moment when the South needed it. If Graham Taylor, the President,
and the Executive Committee of the Conference of Charities had said,
"This conference is going to admit every decently behaved human being,
who wishes to h\'ear its deliberations, on equal terms," then the
Sociological Conference could have taken its stand with the moral
backing of the best of the nation. As it is now, a brave devoted band
find themselves holding a lonely outpost while their northern white
brothers are bravely scuttling to the rear.

If now these southern social radicals look for help to the radical
movement in the South they find that movement largely in the hands of
demagogues like Blease and Vardaman, and radical on everything except
the Negro problem. On that they are reactionary, vindictive, and
positively indecent to a degree which is almost inconceivable. A paper
like the *Harpoon* of Austin, Tex., which is supposed to represent
exceptional democracy and abolition of privilege, never reaches its
prefer depths of vile vituperation until it discusses the Negro, as it
does most ot the time, and yet it imagines itself in harmony with the
forward movements of the world!

Consider, then, these five elements: the struggling, emerging Negro, the
cowardly white North, the advanced white southern reformers, the Negro
hating southern radicals and the reactionary Poes. Can one imagine a
more mischief-making combination?

______________
*Citation:* Du Bois, W.E.B. 1914. "Muddle." *The Crisis*. 8(3):125&ndash;126.