<!--
title:   Young
author:  Du Bois, W.E.B.
journal: The Crisis
year:    1915
volume:  11
issue:   5
pages:   240,242
-->

# Young (1915)

It is peculiarly fitting that Major Charles Young should be the second
Negro American to receive the Spingarn medal. Major Young was born in
Kentucky and educated in Ohio, as we have already noted in the pages of
The Crisis. He is forty-eight years of age, strongly built, and
physically fit. He has just been assigned command of the 2nd Squadron of
the 10th Cavalry stationed in Arizona. Every effort was made by the State Department to retain him in Liberia, where
his work was invaluable, but the Department of War refused to make an
exception in his case under the "Man- chu" Law; and this was well. We
hope yet to see Major Young at the head of the constabulary in Haiti.

But it is not because of this man's military career that he was chosen
as the recipient of the Spingarn medal; nor was it solely because of his
brilliant civic service in Haiti, in Liberia and in California; but
rather because of a certain unusually fine quality of spirit.

Few people know what Major Young suffered at West Point. There was no
refinement of cruelty and insult that was not heaped on this black boy
by his white fellows in the first three years of his career to drive him
out of the institution. The same kind of social difficulties and
temptations faced him during his early career in the army. He has faced
insult as he has faced his daily bread, and with the same imperturbable
balance and determination.

He has not only faced death in war, but---what is much more
difficult---he has faced it in peace. When he last returned to Africa
after an unusually severe attack of Black Water Fever not one of his
friends expected to see him alive again. It was a piece of bravery
almost foolhardy; but he went and won and comes back strong and ready
for further sacrifices.

The Liberian Government has expressed its "grateful appreciation of the
most valuable services by Major Young," services "which will always
stand as a monument to the Major's name in the military annals of the
Republic."

The Adjutant-General of the United States says of the Liberian frontier:
"It has been only with the most careful advisory supervision of Major
Young that peace and order has been maintained."

Leonard Wood, Major-General of the United States Army, says that Major
Young's "service in the army has been highly creditable to his race from
every standpoint."

This is the man whom this Association is honoring itself by honoring.

______________
*Citation:* Du Bois, W.E.B. 1915. "Young." *The Crisis*. 11(5):240,242.