<!--
title:   The Church and the Negro
author:  Du Bois, W.E.B.
journal: The Crisis
year:    1913
volume:  6
issue:   6
pages:   290-291
-->

# The Church and the Negro (1913)

The relation of the church to the Negro is, or should be, a very simple
proposition. Leaving aside the supernatural significance of the church
organization, we have here groups of people working for human uplift and
professing the highest and most unselfish morality as exemplified by the
life and teaching of Jesus of Nazareth and the Golden Rule.

By this standard all church members should treat Negroes as they
themselves would wish to be treated if they were colored. They should do
this and teach this and, if need be, die for this creed.

The plain facts are sadly at variance with this doctrine. The church
aided
and abetted the Negro slave trade; the church was the bulwark of
American slavery; and the church to-day is the strongest seat of racial
and color prejudice. If one hundred of the best and purest colored folk
of the United States should seek to apply for membership in any white
church in this land tomorrow, 999 out of every 1,000 ministers would lie
to keep them out. They would not only do this, but would openly and
brazenly defend their action as worthy of followers of Jesus Christ.

Yet Jesus Christ was a laborer and black men are laborers; He was poor
and we are poor; He was despised of his fellow men and we are despised;
He was persecuted and crucified, and we are mobbed and lynched. If Jesus
Christ came to America He would associate with Negroes and Italians and
working people; He would eat and pray with them, and He would seldom see
the interior of the Cathedral of Saint John the Divine.

Why then are His so-called followers deaf, dumb and blind on the Negro
Problem --- on the human problem?

Because they think they have discovered bypaths to righteousness which
do not lead to brotherhood with the poor, the dirty, the ignorant and
the black. "Make them servants." they say; "we need cooks." But can a
whole race be doomed to menial service in a civilization where menial
service is itself doomed? And when menial service has become Service and
lost its social stigma, so that white folk want to enter such service,
will they welcome black folk as fellow servants? Certainly not; and thus
the slavery argument of this cry stands revealed.

"But," cry others, "let the Negroes themselves bear their own social
responsibilities for poverty, ignorance and disease. Segregate them and
pile their sins upon them." Indeed! Are the poor alone responsible for
poverty? And the ignorant for ignorance? Can the rich be allowed to
escape with his spoil and the learned without obligation for his
knowledge? If the black men in America are what they are because of
slavery and oppression, how cowardly for white Christians to deny their
own guilt. The real hypocrisy comes, however, when the Negro, eager to
take responsibility, cries out for power with which to bear it and is
denied such power. Denied higher training for his leaders, denied
industrial opportunity to make a living, the self-assertion and
self-defense of the ballot, denied even hospitals and common schools.
Thus the church gaily tosses him stones for bread.

Even the rock of "Science" on which the white church rested with such
beautiful faith, hoping to prove the majority of humanity inhuman, so
that Fifth Avenue Presbyterianism would not have to dirty its dainty
fingers with Fifty-third Street Baptists --- and black ones at that --- even
this Rock of Ages is falling before honest investigation.

There is but the Golden Rule left --- the despised and rejected Golden
Rule. Can the church follow it? Is there common decency enough in the
millions of white American church members to dare to treat Negroes as
they would like to be treated if they themselves were colored?

______________
*Citation:* Du Bois, W.E.B. 1913. "The Church and the Negro." *The Crisis*. 6(6):290&ndash;291.